# 2.5. FILE MANAGEMENT

## Organizing files and directories

- `touch` >> create an empty file (or multiple files)

> [!NOTE]
> More precisely: it modifies the timestamp of a file: if the file already exists, only its timestamp will be modified, otherwise, a new (and empty) file is created.

- `mkdir` >> (make directory) create a new directory
- `mv` >> (move) move an existing file to another location. Can also be used to rename an existing file.
- `cp` >> (copy) to copy an existing file
  - `cp -R` copies a whole folder
- `rm` >> (remove) to remove a file (or multiple files at once)
  - for deleting a directory, you need to use the option `–r` (works for empty and non-empty directories)
  - `rmdir` (remove directory) >> to delete an empty directory (if there are hidden files, it won't be deleted neither)

## Filename expansion (globbing)

Bash can rewrite our command before it is being executed. Globbing recognizes and expands pre-defined wildcard characters, it will then search for files that match this pattern and expand (rewrite) our command.

- This allows us to easily access multiple files
- Wildcard character: `*` Matches 0 to any number of characters

  > [!IMPORTANT]
  > The wildcard characters must not be quoted (so neither in 'single quotes' nor "double quotes")
  > Globbing does not use regular expressions

  <br>

  **Additional ways to use globbing**

- `?` >> matches any single character
- `[0-9]` >> The square brackets allow us to specify a character
  range (here: all numbers).

       - Eg. `echo [iI][mM][gG]2*` (will print for all `img2_.jpg` or `IMG2_.jpg` files in every directory)

- `**` >> matches zero up to arbitrarily many characters (including `/`).

       - Eg. `echo **/*.jpg` (will search for all `.jpg` files in every directory)

- Only supported in Bash 4.0 or higher! It might be necessary to enable this: `shopt -s globstar`

> [!CAUTION]
> Bash doesn't differentiate between a folder and a parameter - And a name of a file may be interpreted as a parameter
> It can be dangerous especially if a file has a name such as: `-rf`:
> If we then execute` rm _` in that folder:
> ► 1.: The `_` will be expanded, so -`rf` will appear in the command
> ► 2.: rm will think that -rf is a parameter (-r means: recursive; -f means: don't ask)
> So, we should prefer globbing with ./`_` over `_`

## Handle text files

- `cat` >> - The command cat allows to print the contents of a file. Eg: `cat data.txt`

- `head` >> Shows us the start of a (text) file

  - We can specify the Parameter `-n `for the number of lines `- head -n 5 data.txt`

- `tail`: Read a file from the end

- `less` >> Allows us to read large files.

  - We can use the `arrow keys` to navigate through the file
  - Or we can use `f` (forward) and (backward) to navigate a whole
    page ahead or back
  - We can also navigate to a percentage of our content: enter `50p` to navigate to 50% of our content
  - `=` to show info about our current position
  - `-N `to display row numbers
  - Find in file: Forward search: `/Search Term`; Backwards search: `?Search Term `
  - To quit: `q`

- `wc` (word count):

  - `wc -lwc file.txt` >> Prints out the number of lines, the number of words, and the number of bytes in the file
  - `wc -l file.txt` >> Counts the number of lines
  - `wc -w file.txt ` >> Counts the number of words
  - `wc -c file.txt` >> Counts the number of bytes (=8 bit ASCII-characters)

- `du` (disk usage) >> It will calculate the size of all items in this folder
  - We can also specify the parameter `-s`, to just get a summary
