# 4.3. Work with numerical data

## How to calculate with Bash

- Bash can calculate with integers within double round brackets: `((...))`
- Within those brackets, we do not need a `$` to access variables.
  eg:

```bash
    x=1 y=2
  (( result = x + y ))
  echo "${result}"
```

## How do we output the result directly?

- We can use `$((...))`:

```bash
x=1 y=2
echo "$(( x + y ))"
```

## Declare integer variables in Bash

- We can declare the type of a variable `- declare –i ivar` and if we then assign a value to this variable, the expression will automatically be evaluated
- However, be careful: Integer variables will calculate math for us it is possible to omit the round brackets in certain cases - but not always:
  - `x=4; y=3; ivar=x+y`
  - Best practice: `(( ivar = x + y )) - ivar=$(( x + y ))`

## Decimal numbers in Bash

- Bash can only calculate with integers: There's no way to run calculations on decimal numbers.
- So this will just return 2: `echo "$(( 5 / 2 ))"`
- We could use the modulo operator (`%`) to get the remainder in the integer division:
  `echo"$((5%2))"` returns 1 because: 5/2=2 (integer division), and the remainder is 5-2\*2=1
- However, there's the Unix command `bc`(basic calculator): It is a whole numerical programming language, but usually, we only use it for floating point calculations in Bash. It takes a string, and then runs the commands from that string. Eg.: `echo "12.3 + 4.5" | bc`
  - For division: We need to set a scale first. This specifies the number of decimal places for our result: `echo "scale=4; 12.3 / 4.5" | bc`

## Sumarizing numbers with AWK

awk is a programming language to analyze text files. It's especially useful for tabular data, or CSV (Comma separated values) files.

- To sum up a file, we can use the following script:
  `awk '{ sum += $1 } END { print sum }' file`
  - The first code block `({ sum += $1 })` is executed for each line
  - The code block after the `END` is executed at the end
- Thus, the sum is calculated and printed at the end
- If you want to summarize a CSV file, you can configure the character by which columns are being split. Let's say the data was in the following format:

  - Budapest; 1800000
  - New York; 8500000
  - London; 9000000

- `awk -F ';' '{ sum += $2 } END { print sum }' file`

  1. First, we change the delimiter by which the columns are detected: `-F ';'`
  2. we can just access the second column: `$2`

- For simple tasks, Bash might be enough
- And for more complex tasks, Python is usually way more
  versatile
